---
layout: post
title: Meeting C++ 2017 trip report
tags: [cpp, events]
description: >
  I was at Meeting C++ 2017 to give a talk and then relax while listening to other speakers.
  That didn't go exactly as planned.
author: mropert
---

About 6 months ago, I sent the abstract of one of my submissions to CppCon to my colleague Jonathan Boccara for advice.
A few messages in the discussion he asks "did you also submit for Meeting C++?" and I admitted the thought
haven't crossed my mind. To me speaking at one conference like CppCon was already a big step and that it would
be redundant to propose the same talk at two different conferences anyway.

Turns out I was dead wrong, because first of all the hardest part in a talk is giving it the first time at a conference.
After that, it becomes easier and easier so it does actually amortize the cost of preparing it (that and you gain more
confidence with experience).

Second, each conference has its own public and even if some do attend most/all of them, that's clearly a minority.
For the rest, it's probably the only time they get to see you live on stage and can then talk in person.

There's also replays on YouTube or others but let's be honest: watching talks take time and we're all busy.
So by speaking at conference you give people a chance to watch talks they probably wouldn't have otherwise.

## Talks, talks, talks

Even if I ended doing two talks (and a lightning talk) because Jens had to fill some slots from last minute
cancellation, most of my time was still spent on watching others show cool stuff.

### Keynotes

Of course it began with Sean Parent, which I was very eager to meet in person. His talk about removing raw loops
from your code is still one of my favourites and if you still haven't watched it, stop wasting your time reading
my blog and do so now.
His keynote built upon his previous one from CppCon 2016 about relationships and the importance for us to learn
to reason about them when we design software. One of the key takeaways is that user interaction defines the way
your code will be constructed much more that most developers realize because you derive the relationship
between objects from that.
One example was two linked toggle settings in a UI where setting one implies the other (but not the other way around).
There are a couple of way to express that and more that one correct answer, but in a lot of applications not two
will behave the same way.

Sean has put a lot of thinking into that and written a couple of academic paper with a researcher that you can find HERE.
It's odd to see that it could a C++ developer to work on a formal representation of UX specifications because C++
is rarely seen as a front-end language.

The second keynote was given by the great Kate Gregory who is really good at engaging audiences. Her subject was simplicity.
The fact that we always want things to be more simple, more expressive and more elegant. Verboseness in code is usually
the sign of over-complicated design so try to make thing plain and unambiguous. As she pointed out, guidelines
are usually no exception but it can lead us astray. Software IS complicated. Abstractions ARE imperfect.
So while we should try to KISS, guidelines can't be oversimplified.

An example I found was Sean's "No Raw Loops" he put in his slides in XXXXXXXX. That's a good phrase on presentation
because it's short and easy to process, but that's a terrible guideline. If you make it one, you'll end up with convoluted
lambdas inside calls to `std::for_each` just to write a simple "multiply all values in this array by 2".
Sometimes there's an algorithm you can use, sometimes you can make a new one, that's great and should try if that make sense
but also sometimes you just want to mutate the content of a `std::vector` with a simple operation that make no sense
