---
layout: post
title: "ACCU 2019 trip report"
tags: [cpp, events]
description: > 
  This year I was ready. I had prepared a stock of jokes about Britain, its food, its weather,
  the absence of good wine and the tumultuous relationship with the EU. It was time for ACCU
  2019.
author: mropert
---

This year's edition of ACCU was held from April 10th to April 13th, in Bristol as always.
I arrived a day earlier from Paris after a short stop in France which was supposed to offer
some supply of good weather and trips to a few winemakers in preparation for the harsh
conditions of Great Britain.

From the start things went awry as I could only spare half an hour for a visit to a winemaker
in Vouvray who turned out to be quite forgettable, not to mention the weather that was only
barely keeping it up together. Still I didn't immediately notice that something was off, having
spent the pasts months enduring the cold winter of Sweden. It took a second flight from
Paris to Bristol to realize it: spring is there (although a couple of Bristol locals apologized
for the weather being unexpectedly non-terrible).

## Many meetings

My arrival was pretty unremarkable. It was, of course, raining and people still drove on the
wrong side of the road. I had come across my former colleague Jonathan Boccara (of
[Fluent C++](https://www.fluentcpp.com) fame) while waiting at my gate. We traded some war
stories and he told me about his book he would be showing at the conference.
I didn't have the time to read it yet but I already heard some positive feedback about it.

ACCU is, like most conferences, a good time for me to spend some time face to face with friends
from the C++ community living around the world. It is sometimes said that there is more value
in the discussions with the people you meet at conferences that with the conference content and
I would partly agree. Depending on the circumstances, I do feel like the bulk of the value falls
slightly one side or the other. At times there's a presentation that justifies
the whole ticket in itself, sometimes I meet someone and have a discussion that is as valuable
to me as the sum of all the talks I attend to.

The other reason I often see so many familiar faces is that, in my opinion, people don't try
to attend conferences nearly enough. After asking around a bit it does seem like I'm not the
only one to have noticed that. Regardless of the company, there will be a small minority
that ask their manager to be sent there, and large majority who will never do so. I am not
sure how to explain it. Not feeling like it's worth the time? Thinking it's only for some
"elite"? Maybe simply too focused on the day-to-day job, on the next deadline?

I don't claim to have the answer, but I will certainly encourage anyone who never asks to go to do so,
and those who do to encourage their colleagues to do the same. We are always happy to see new
faces, meet new people and buy them a drink at the conference bar at the end of the day.

## Keynotes

As I mentioned in my last year [trip report](https://mropert.github.io/2018/04/20/accu_2018/),
I was a bit disappointed by 2018's opening keynote. This time was quite the opposite. ACCU 2019
opened with M. Angela Sasse telling us about security. The key takeaway was that the human, the
user, will always be the weak link regardless of the technology deployed. More importantly, the
fact that security is everyone's business and not just the IT department means it must offer a good
UX else it will be badly used or worked around. This was pointed out in the 90s and it still hold true
today, with sadly little progress to show for it.

The great Herb Sutter travelled from his Redmond office to England to tell us about his vision
for the future of error handling in C++. While I already knew about his work on the matter
(it was sent to SG14 for review a couple months back), it was nice to have a refresher in
front of the all conference. In short, the direction is toward better exceptions, with bounded,
predictable `throw` and `catch` times. No more need for dynamic allocation. No extra cost when
no exception occur (this is already mostly the case on `x86_64`) and a push for `noexcept` becoming
the default unless otherwise specified.

The closing keynote was given to none other that Kate Gregory who walked us through a nice lecture
on code empathy, or how to read the previous programmer's emotions through existing code, try to
understand what triggered those emotions and how to react when confronted to it. I have a hunch that
it will be a nice combination to Jonathan's book on how to deal with legacy code, as the two seem
closely related.

## Talks

At the rate of 3 talks a day outside keynotes, there was a total of 12 I could potentially attend
during the conference. Subtract one because I had to attend mine and perhaps another one where I was
busy writing slides and we get a rough estimate of about 10. While that number could make for a nice
clickbait section ("10 ACCU talks you won't believe I attended"), I will stick to my boring routine
of mentioning the ones I remember the most. Also keep in mind that there were 5 tracks, meaning I
saw roughly 17% of the conference content.

The two talks that made the biggest impression on me were Vittorio Romeo's
_Higher-order functions and `function_ref`_ and Andreas Weiss' _Taming Dynamic Memory - An Introduction to Custom Allocators_.
The first one did a good job of explaining
what higher-order functions are and also the content and benefits of the `function_ref` proposed
addition to the C++ standard , all in one session. The second one offered a good tour of custom
allocators, how they work and when they can be considered to replace the standard ones. Both
presenters also had to accomplish their tasks while fending off the many questions coming from
John Lakos who sat on the first row each time (a victory he congratulated them for at the end).

The next two talks I can think about were Peter Bindel's and Simon Brand's _Hello world from scratch_,
and Andy Balaam and CB Bailey's _How does git actually work?_. Both explained things we
do every day by taking very simple use case (building a very simple program and committing some
changes to a VCS) and showing what happens under the hood. They also both ran out of time before
showing all they had planned because it turns out abstraction is no myth: even our simplest tasks are
actually fairly complex when you look at how they are done. I think they both did a good job at it
and would gladly schedule both in a "how does XXX works" track. That is a good theme that I would
suggest having at every conference.

Next up is Kevlin Henney's _What do you mean_. Kevlin is quite the celebrity in Bristol
and I really liked his talk at the previous edition. While perhaps
not as remarkable (I would have appreciated a clearer outline to follow), this one was still quite interesting.
The main point was that meaning is derived from both what is said or written and the context that surrounds
it. The latter being subjective, it implies a bunch of assumptions by both parties that, when not
in line, lead to quite the misunderstanding. The main obstacle to solving that problem is that
assumptions are, by definition, implicit and so can only be discovered when proved wrong
("Oh but I assumed that..."). This of course brings us back to the software craftmanship practices
of frequent iterative deliveries and testing.

Finally I'd like to mention Christopher Di Bella's _How to Teach C++ and Influence a Generation_.
Last year, Christopher started SG20, a study group in the standard committee focused on education.
Education and teaching is an important subject to me, partly because of my own personal experience
of learning C++ in school, then learning another language also called C++ around 5-10 years later.
As you may guess, the first one was more in the line of "C with classes" while the second
looked more like the C++ we know and recommend today. To that end the group has worked on
some guidelines on how to write teaching materials. They also run polls to better understand how
and when people learn C++. A good complement to this talk would be Bjarne's keynote at CppCon 2017
[Learning and Teaching Modern C++](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fX2W3nNjJIo).

## Lightning talks

One of the best things at ACCU is how the lightning talks sessions are organized. They are simply
done in the keynote room as the closing session of each day. That way, most of the conference
attends before going out for beers or dinner. Program is usually decided between the day before
and a couple hours before the session, meaning last minute entries are definitely an option.

It's a great opportunity to bring up a point you had in mind but couldn't get in as a talk, respond
to a previous talk (or lightning talk) or simply raise awareness in the community on a
particular matter. For example, upon arriving in Bristol on Tuesday I learnt that the great people
from the Paris meetup were planning to announce a new conference. I put a few slides together,
slipped in a joke or two about english food and Brexit, then went up on stage on Wednesday to tell
everyone about [CPPP](https://cppp.fr/).

Of all the C++ conferences I went to, I think this formula works best and is one of the reasons ACCU
feels like a big family gathering. If you are a conference organizer and have some lightning talk
sessions, I strongly suggest you consider this option. It might feel intimidating to step up on
stage in front the entire conference, but then again I feel the familial atmosphere helps reducing
the pressure.

## Until next time

On Friday I gave my talk,
[The State of Package Management in C++](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k99_qbB2FvM). Frequent
readers of this blog will probably be familiar with the topic. I gave a tour of package management
in C++, why we want it and how far we've come yet (spoiler warning: enough for you to try it).
As you can see the ACCU has made a fantastic job of uploading the recording on YouTube in less than
a week.

But the greatest learning of all for me came after the conference, when I discovered that airlines
will now charge you 50£ when boarding your plane for bringing a laptop bag with your carry-on
luggage. I used to do that all the time, but today it appears you can be charged extra depending
on the mood. I suppose next time I will have to put my stuff in cargo :(

Do not let that stop you from attending conferences though, I still hope to see you there!
